# Using Conda for Software Installation

This section covers using conda to install scientific software.

## What is Conda?

Installing scientific software (including all required dependencies of said software!) is often challenging.
Conda is a software manager that helps you find and install software packages.


## Set up Miniconda

To get started, we'll install miniconda, which contains everything we need to get started with conda.

Log in to farm and run the following commands to install Miniconda. 
Follow the prompts on the screen and accept all default options.

### Install conda

```
wget https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
bash Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
```

Again, be sure to answer `yes` to any yes/no questions, especially the last question about `conda init`!
This will ensure conda is fully installed and you'll be able to use it for the commands below.

### Activate conda

Miniconda is now installed, but we need to activate it to be able to use it.
```
source ~/.bashrc
```
This command executes our `~/.bashrc` command, which should now have

You should now see `(base)` in front of your prompt, indicating that you are in the base environment.

## Configuring channels

Conda works by searching for software packages in online repositories (**Channels**).
By default, conda searches for software only in Continuum’s (Conda’s developer) channels.

Most of the scientific software we'll be using is not available within the default channel, so we will add additional channels to our conda settings.

Channels in Conda are ordered. 
The channel with the highest priority is the first one that Conda checks, looking for the package you asked for. 
You can change this order, and also add channels to it (and set their priority as well).

If multiple channels contain a package, and one channel contains a newer version than the other one, the order of the channels’ determines which one of these two versions are going to be installed, even if the higher priority channel contains the older version.
```
conda config --add channels defaults
conda config --add channels bioconda
conda config --add channels conda-forge
```
Note that these commands stack. In this case, the highest priority channel will be `conda-forge`, followed by `bioconda` and then the `defaults` channel.

So when installing software, conda will start by looking for our desired software packing in the `conda-forge` channel, then search in the `bioconda` channel, and finally search in the `defaults` channel.


## Using Conda environments

Different software packages often have different "dependencies": other software packages that are required for installation.
In many cases, you'll need software with dependencies that conflict -- e.g. one program requires python version 3, while the other requires python 2.
To avoid conflicts, we install software into "environments" that are isolated from one another - so that the software installed in one environment does not impact the software installed in another environment.

### Create an environment
Let's start by creating an environment for this project

```
conda create -y --name nsurp-env
```

This creates an empty environment named `nsurp-env`.
To activate this environment, run:

```
conda activate nsurp-env
```

Your prompt should now start with `(nsurp-env)`.

### Install software into the environment

We can now install software into our environment. 
Let's install sourmash, which we will use in a later lesson. 

```
conda install -y sourmash
```

## Deactivating and Exiting

When you'd like to leave your environment, you can type `conda deactivate` and you will return to the base environment.

When you log out of farm by typing `exit`, when you end a `tmux` or `screen` session, or when an `srun` job ends, your environment will automatically be deactivated.
To restart the environment, you can run `conda activate nsurp-env`.

## Additional Resources

[This tutorial](https://angus.readthedocs.io/en/2019/conda_tutorial.html) covers the basics of conda including a brief introduction to conda and why it is useful, installation and setup, creating environments, and installing software. 

These videos cover the material in the above tutorial: 
  
  + [video 1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ef1QwhELuMs)
  + [video 2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MOlYlvBBa9c) (there were some technical issues with this recording...sorry!)
