Comparing Samples with Sourmash
===

*(beware: module under construction)*

Often times, the goal of a metagenomic sequencing project is
to compare the differences in microorganism composition between samples. 

There are many ways to get at this question, but we can start by using k-mer profiles of the reads to quickly compare samples using `sourmash compare`.


## Workspace Setup

If you're starting a new work session on FARM, be sure to follow the instructions [here](05.starting-a-work-session.md).

## Make the data accessible

First, let's make a directory that we will be working in:
```
mkdir -p ${PROJECT}/sourmash-compare
cd ${PROJECT}/sourmash-compare
```

Let's link in our trimmed reads.

```
ln -s $PROJECT/trim/*1.qc.fq.gz .
ln -s $PROJECT/trim/*2.qc.fq.gz .
```

## Calculate sourmash signatures

Now we can calculate signatures for each of the files. This will take 5 or 10 minutes to run

```
for infile in *1.qc.fq.gz
do
    j=$(basename ${infile} 1.qc.fq.gz)
    sourmash compute -k 31 --scaled 10000 --track-abundance --merge ${j} -o ${j}.sig ${j}2.qc.fq.gz ${infile}
done
```

Using these signatures, we can compare our samples.

## Compare sample signatures


```
sourmash compare -k 31 -o tara-trimmed.comp *sig
```

Now let's plot! Sourmash has a built in plot utility that we can take advantage of.
The output is a heatmap.

```
sourmash plot --labels tara-trimmed.comp
```

This produces a file, `tara-trimmed.comp.matrix.png`, that contains a
similarity matrix.
You can see the heatmap [here](https://github.com/ngs-docs/2018-cicese-metatranscriptomics/blob/master/docs/files/tara-trimmed.comp.matrix.png)

We can also use the output of sourmash compare to calculate an MDS plot. Let's
rerun `sourmash compare`, this time saving the output in csv format.
```
sourmash compare -k 31 --csv tara-trimmed.comp.csv *sig
```

We can use this output to make a Multidimensional Scaling plot. MDS plots are
commonly used in transcriptome workflows to visualize distance between samples.
Here the strength is we used all of our reads to calculate these distances.

To make an MDS plot, run:
```
ln -s /LUSTRE/bioinformatica_data/bioinformatica2018/scripts/mds_plot.R .
Rscript mds_plot.R tara-trimmed.comp.csv tara-trimmed-comp-mds.pdf
```

The script source is [here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ngs-docs/2018-cicese-metatranscriptomics/master/scripts/mds_plot.R) if you are interested!

This outputs a file `tara-trimmed-comp-mds.pdf`.  You can see what
that visualization looks like
[here](https://github.com/ngs-docs/2018-cicese-metatranscriptomics/blob/master/docs/files/tara-trimmed-comp-mds.pdf).

We see that our samples cluster by site (`TARA_135` vs `TARA_136`) and
then by depth (SRF for surface vs DCM for deep cholorophyl maximum).

Throughout this lesson we have been working with raw reads.
Raw reads contain a lot of errors, and these errors are included in the
signatures. Next we will learn to k-mer trim our reads, and then re-run
`compare` to see if makes a difference!
